Improvements to typed errors docs (#173)
arrow-kt/arrow-website: content/docs/learn/typed-errors/working-with-typed-errors.md

:::

There are two main approaches to representing types in the signature of a function.
Fortunately, Arrow provides a _uniform_ API to working with all of them, which is described in the rest of this section.

The first approach is using a _wrapper type_, in which the return type of your function
is nested within a larger type that provides the choice of error. 
In that way the error is represented as a _value_.
For example, the following signature expresses that the outcome of `findUser` is 
of type `User` when successful, or `UserNotFound` when a logical failure is raised.

```
fun findUser(id: UserId): Either<UserNotFound, User>
```

The Kotlin standard library includes a few wrapper types, but they are all restricted in the information they may include.
Arrow introduces `Either` and `Ior`, both giving the developer the choice of type of logical failures, and reflecting that choice
as their first type parameter.

| Type | Failure | Simultaneous <br /> success and failure? | Kotlin stdlib. or Arrow? |
|---|---------|------|---|
| `A?` | No information | | <img src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/37/Kotlin_Icon_2021.svg" style={{height: '20px'}} /> |

> | `Option<A>` | No information | | <img src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/37/Kotlin_Icon_2021.svg" style={{height: '20px'}} /> |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `Option<A>` | No information | | <img src="/img/arrow-brand-icon.svg" style={{height: '20px'}} /> |
```

---
description: Working, recovering, and accumulating errors in a typed and concise way.
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Working with typed errors

<!--- TEST_NAME TypedErrorsTest -->

_Typed errors_ refer to a technique from functional programming in which we
make _explicit_ in the signature (or _type_) the potential errors that may
arise during the execution of a piece of code. This is not the case when using
exceptions, which any documentation is not taken into account by the compiler,
leading to a defensive mode of error handling.

:::info Media resources

- [_Functional Error Handling - A Practical Approach_](https://kotlindevday.com/videos/functional-error-handling-a-practical-approach-bas-de-groot/) by Bas de Groot
- [_Exception handling in Kotlin with Arrow_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ipF540mBG9w) by Ramandeep Kaur

> - [_Por qué no uso excepciones en mi código_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8WdprhzmQe4) by Raúl Raja and [Codely](https://codely.com/)

Reviewer 2: @serras if you find it relevant, do you mind also putting my blog in this media links? https://medium.com/@mitchellyuwono/typed-error-handling-in-kotlin-11ff25882880

The reason why I believe this might help is many have reached out to me asking for real empirical evidence or code comparison as for "why" they should be using arrow for typed error handling.

Author: Done!

:::

## Concepts and types

In the rest of the documentation we often refer to a few concepts related to error handling.

:::note Logical Failure vs. Real exceptions

We use the term _logical failure_ to describe a situation not deemed as successful in your domain, but that it's still within the realms of that domain.
For example, if you are implementing a repository for users, not finding a user for a certain query is a logical failure.

> In contrast to logical failures we have _real exceptions_, which are problems, usually technical, which do not fit in the domain.
> For example, if the connection to the database suddenly drops, or the connection credentials are wrong.

Reviewer: Examples are tricky IMO, since it heavily depends on the use-case. I.e. `the connection credentials are wrong` can be very valid to lift to the type level if you have a large configuration and want to _accumulate_ errors of different parts of your configuration.

```suggestion
In contrast to logical failures we have _real exceptions_, which are problems, usually technical, which are _truly exceptional_ and are thus not part of our domain.
For example, if the connection to the database suddenly drops, or network times out, host unavailable, etc.
```

Perhaps also a good place to mention `Resilience` in terms of _truly exceptional_ things? 🤔

or additionally describes the range of problems that may arise.

:::

There are two main approaches to representing types in the signature of a function.
Fortunately, Arrow provides a _uniform_ API to working with all of them, which is described in the rest of this section.

The first approach is using a _wrapper type_, in which the return type of your function
is nested within a larger type that provides the choice of error. 
In that way the error is represented as a _value_.
For example, the following signature expresses that the outcome of `findUser` is 
of type `User` when successful, or `UserNotFound` when a logical failure is raised.

```
fun findUser(id: UserId): Either<UserNotFound, User>
```

The Kotlin standard library includes a few wrapper types, but they are all restricted in the information they may include.
Arrow introduces `Either` and `Ior`, both giving the developer the choice of type of logical failures, and reflecting that choice
as their first type parameter.

| Type | Failure | Simultaneous <br /> success and failure? | Kotlin stdlib. or Arrow? |
|---|---------|------|---|

> | `A?` | No information | | <img src="https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/37/Kotlin_Icon_2021.svg" style={{height: '20px'}} /> |

Reviewer 2: @serras I wonder if we should be more specific using a subject, something like "value is null" for nullable, and "value is empty (`None`)" for `Option<A>`, "value is left with a generic type `E`"... etc.  I tried rendering the page and saw "No information", I thought there was a javascript problem 😅

Author: Good idea, I'll add this in the upcoming commit.

:::

## Summary

At this point we can summarize the advantages that typed errors offer over using exceptions:

- **Type Safety:** Typed errors allow the compiler to find type mismatches early, making it easier to catch bugs before they make it to production. However, with exceptions, the type information is lost, making it more difficult to detect errors at compile-time.

- **Predictability:** When using typed errors, the possible error conditions are explicitly listed in the type signature of a function. This makes it easier to understand the possible error conditions and write tests covering all error scenarios.

> - **Composability:** Typed errors can be easily combined and propagated through a series of function calls, making writing modular, composable code easier. With exceptions, ensuring errors are correctly propagated through a complex codebase can be difficult. Patterns like accumulation, which are at your fingertips using typed errors, become quite convoluted using exceptions.

Reviewer 2: Another suggestion to the readme @serras. I've got some feedback from colleagues that when they reads this documentation, they were looking to find a code example that illustrate computation chaining for a production use case. I remember something like that used to exist in the old docs about comprehension.

Having said that, may I suggest adding a snippet along these lines. This is the same code I put in kotlinlang https://kotlinlang.slack.com/archives/C0B9K7EP2/p1680694416774339?thread_ts=1680388003.721149&cid=C0B9K7EP2. Feel free to modify this as appropriate.. Notice that I've also used sealed class as the failure case. I noticed most (i guess > 80%) production usecases that we've encountered uses sealed classes as well to model the failures. I'm not going to be surprised if many users out there also do the same. I hope that can give something more concrete for users.

```kotlin
context(Raise<UpdateUserFailure>) // this is a different error boundary
suspend fun updateUser(...): User = ...

context(Raise<ProvisioningFailure>)
suspend fun checkManagedStatus(...): Unit = ensure(user.isManaged) { 
  ProvisioningFailure.NotManaged 
}

context(Raise<ProvisioningFailure>)
suspend fun checkProvisioningPolicy(...): Unit = ...

context(Raise<ProvisioningFailure>)
suspend fun provision(): User {
  checkManagedStatus(...)
  checkProvisioningPolicy(...)

  val updatedUser = recover({ updateUser(...) }) {
    when (it) {
      is UserNotFound -> raise(ProvisioningFailure.InvalidUser)
      is UpdateRejected -> raise(ProvisioningFailure.InvalidUpdate)
    }
  }

  updatedUser
}
```

We can also encourage user to prepare for context receiver accordingly by providing a version of the composition in `either { }`. 
```kotlin
suspend fun provision(): Either<ProvisioningFailure, User> = either {
  checkManagedStatus(...).bind()
  checkProvisioningPolicy(...).bind()

  val updatedUser = recover({ updateUser(...).bind() }) {
    when (it) {
      is UserNotFound -> raise(ProvisioningFailure.InvalidUser)
      is UpdateRejected -> raise(ProvisioningFailure.InvalidUpdate)
    }
  }

  updatedUser
}
```

Author: Thanks for the very concrete example, @myuwono. We got similar feedback from other people, which only reinforces the fact that our docs are lacking in that respect. I made some changes in this document to clarify the situation, do you think the read better now?

I'm hesitant, though, to make the introduction even longer. Maybe we should have a full worked-out example where we describe these ideas, like how to design your error hierarchy, the different boundaries, and so on?

Reviewer 2: That's a brilliant idea.
